
If you’re looking to maintain ketosis, you may need to avoid or reduce portion sizes of some foods, including refined carbs, starchy vegetables, and certain fruits.The keto diet is an extremely low carb, high fat diet. The goal is to achieve a metabolic state of ketosis, in which your body burns mostly fat instead of carbs for energy (1, 2, 3, 4).While controversial and not for everyone, the keto diet has been linked to weight loss and potential short-term health benefits like improved blood pressure (5).If you’re looking to begin or maintain ketosis, there are some foods to avoid — specifically, foods that are too high in carbs.The structure of carb molecules is simple, making them easy for your body to break down. Thus, they’re an efficient source of energy. If your body is provided a lot of carbs, especially at once, it will do what’s most efficient: use carbs instead of fat for energy (1, 2, 3, 4).On the keto diet, carbs are typically restricted to 20–50 grams per day. Generally, this total doesn’t tally the portion of carbs made up of dietary fiber, as these aren’t digested by your body (5).On a 2,000-calorie diet, a keto diet will typically be composed of 55–60% fat, 30–35% protein, and 5–10% carbs (2).Here are 16 foods to avoid or limit on the keto diet, some of which might surprise you.Share on Pinterestwebphotographeer/Getty Images1. Bread, pasta, rice, and other refined carbsEating refined high carb foods like white bread, pasta, rice, and pastries could prevent a ketogenic state if you end up getting more than your daily carb allowance. Here’s the carb count per portion of these starchy foods (6, 7, 8, 9):Type of refined carbServing sizeCarbsFiberWhite sandwich bread1 slice (27.3 grams)13 grams<1 gramCooked white pasta1 cup (107 grams)33 grams2 gramsCooked white rice1/2 cup (186 grams)26.5 grams<1 gramWhite flour tortilla1 regular (72 grams)36 grams2.5 gramsWhile these are fine to eat in moderation if you’re not following a low carb diet, those looking to achieve or maintain ketosis will need to limit them.Try mashed or riced cauliflower as a substitute, or experiment with low carb bread made from eggs, nuts, and seeds.2. Beer and mixed drinksBeer, liqueurs, and mixed liquor-based drinks have a high carb and low nutrient count, which makes them foods to avoid on a keto diet. For example, here’s the carb content of some popular options (10, 11, 12, 13):Type of drinkServing sizeCarbsBeer1 can (356 mL)13 gramsVodka tonic1 drink (255 mL)15 gramsRum and cola1 drink (225 mL)18 gramsMargarita1 drink (225 mL)36 gramsKeep in mind that most of the carbs in mixed drinks like vodka tonic or rum and coke are from sodas, juices, purees, and liqueurs (14, 15).Instead, lower carb drinks — like dry red or white wine or hard liquor — will be your best bet if you want to imbibe a drink, as these provide around 5 grams of carbs or less per standard serving (14, 15). It’s worth noting, though, that most alcoholic drinks provide little in the way of micronutrients like vitamins and minerals. Generally, it’s wiser to save your sparse daily carb allowance for nutrient-rich fruits, vegetables, legumes, and grains (10).In fact, if you’re restricting carbs, the carbs you do eat should boast plenty of nutrition. This can help ward off the risk of nutritional deficiencies that are associated with keto diets long term (16, 17).It’s also worth noting that there is little research on the effects of alcohol on the liver while following a ketogenic diet.3. Honey and syrupsHoney and syrups like agave or maple are concentrated sugar. They contain little else and can easily increase your daily carb count — without otherwise providing significant nutrition.Honey, for instance, packs 17 grams of carbs into 1 tablespoon (21 grams), while maple syrup has 13 grams per tablespoon (20 grams) (18, 19).While these contain antioxidants and other nutrients, they can cause blood sugar spikes and flip you out of ketosis (2, 17, 20, 21).4. JuiceWhile boasting more vitamins and minerals than honey and syrups, juice is still high in naturally occurring sugar. It also lacks dietary fiber. This is problematic, as fiber is needed for proper digestion and can be tricky to get enough of on the keto diet (22, 23).Fiber is important, as it slows down the transit time of food along your digestive tract, thereby assisting with blood sugar control (22).If you want to maintain ketosis, it’s important to avoid consuming high carb, low fiber foods like juice and associated blood sugar spikes (1, 2).5. Sugary sodasSodas are essentially bubbly sugar water that provides zero nutrition and a high carb count. One 12-ounce (372-mL) can of Coca-Cola, for instance, packs a whopping 39 grams of carbs (24).Depending on your daily carb allowance, just one drink can easily get you over the limit (5).If water won’t cut it, you can enjoy a sugar-free soda without being knocked out of keto. While the long-term health effects of these drinks are controversial, an occasional one likely isn’t harmful (25, 26, 27).You can also try sparkling water or still water infused with mint, lemon, or cucumber.6. Ketchup, barbecue sauce, and other condimentsKetchup, barbecue sauce, and sweet chili sauce are a few examples of sugar-packed condiments that don’t provide much in terms of nutrients or fiber (28, 29, 30). These condiments can range from about 3 grams of carbs for ketchup and 4 grams of carbs for barbecue sauce per 9-gram packet. Sweet chili sauce has 15 grams of carbs per 35-gram serving (28, 29, 30).While some of these aren’t as high in carbs as other foods on this list, it’s easy to eat a lot of them. Eating more than small portion sizes could quickly make them non-keto-friendly.Instead, reach for hot vinegar-based sauces like Tabasco or the spice jar if you want to add more flavor to your food without adding to your daily carb count.Fat-rich mayonnaise or whole grain mustard are also good options. Just remember to check the carb content on the label. 7. Glazed or honey-baked hamHoney-baked ham is a bone-in ham usually baked with a honey-butter blend slathered on top and in between slices. After cooking, a dry spiced sugar mix is applied to the outside of the ham and broiled until it forms a crackling glaze (31). Glazed ham is similar, but baked with a thick sauce made of a sweet and pungent element like maple syrup and mustard or fruit jam and vinegar. While delicious, the sugar baked onto or infused into these sweetened hams can keep you from reaching or maintaining ketosis. Instead, opt for regular deli ham, which has less than 1 gram of carbs per slice (13.5 grams) (32).8. Light or low fat margarine Light or low fat margarine is a staple in some weight loss diets. While it’s low carb, it skimps on the fat — your main source of fuel on the keto diet.Because you need more fat to reach and maintain a ketogenic state, reach for unsalted butter or moderate servings of regular margarine instead.Here’s how light margarine compares with regular margarine and unsalted butter (33, 34, 35):Type of butter/margarineServing sizeFat per servingUnsalted butter1 pat (7 grams)5.7 gramsRegular margarine 1 pat (7 grams)4.6 gramsLight margarine1 pat (7 grams)2.7 gramsNote that while margarine is higher in heart-healthy polyunsaturated fat than butter, some types also have more trans fat, which has been linked to detrimental effects on the heart (36).To limit trans fats, avoid margarine with “hydrogenated” written anywhere in the ingredients list (36). 9. Dried fruit or trail mixWhen fruit is dried, its sugar is concentrated into smaller serving sizes.For example, a single pitted Medjool date (24 grams) has 18 grams of carbs, 2 of which are dietary fiber (37).While dates are nutritional powerhouses, they concentrate too much sugar to reasonably be part of a keto diet.Similarly, mixed dried fruit packs 31 grams of carbs per 1/4 cup (40 grams), which can easily put an end to ketosis (38).These are often blended into trail mix, which also often includes chocolate chips, candies, or sugar-coated nuts. This is another food to avoid, as it can easily put you over your carb allotment for the day.Instead, aim for fresh berries to satisfy your sweet tooth. These are fairly low carb, with less than 4 grams of carbs per 1/4 cup (38 grams) (39).10. Low fat diet foodsFoods marketed as low fat tend to be higher in sugar to compensate for the lack of fat (40).Therefore, it’s a good idea to watch out for these items. Read the nutrition label carefully so that you can account for carbs in your daily totals.Common reduced fat foods that are instead high in added sugars include (41, 42, 43, 44): low fat or fat-free yogurtlow fat or fat-free mayonnaiselow fat salad dressingsreduced-fat peanut butterreduced-fat or skim milkAlso, keep in mind that the keto diet aims to be high in fat to provide your body with energy. Therefore, full fat options are the better choice.11. Potatoes and other starchy vegetablesWhile good sources of vitamin C, potassium, and dietary fiber, white and sweet potatoes ought to be avoided on the keto diet because of their high carb content (45, 46).Other nutritious but high carb vegetables to limit include peas and corn (47, 48).Starchy vegetables with slightly fewer carbs per serving include beets and carrots. You may be able to include modest amounts of these if they fit your daily carb allowance (49, 50).If you’re craving starchy vegetables, try lightly grating them onto a salad or bowl rather than making them the main feature of a dish. You can also swap these for small or moderate portions of jicama, which is naturally slightly lower in carbs, at less than 3 grams of carbs per 1/4 cup (33 grams) (51).Mashed or riced cauliflower can also be a good substitute for starchy potato-centered recipes. As a rule of thumb, spinach, mushrooms, tomatoes, cucumber, and celery are generally better suited for your keto goals.12. Sweetened yogurt or dairyNatural yogurt and dairy products can vary in their carb content.When adding dairy to your diet, steer clear of flavored or sweetened varieties, which will add to your carb count. This is especially common in flavored yogurt and cottage cheese.Whole milk has 11 grams of carbs per cup (244 mL). While you can enjoy it occasionally, know that unsweetened almond milk has just 3 grams of carbs in the same serving size, making it a more keto-friendly substitute (52, 53).Aim for plain full fat yogurt or cottage cheese. Strained varieties like Greek yogurt or Icelandic skyr are a good fit. For example, 1 tub (156 grams) of Greek yogurt has about 6 grams of carbs and 16 grams of protein (54).Unsweetened coconut milk-based yogurts can also be a good option. Because they’re made from coconut milk, they generally have more fat and fewer carbs, around 16.5 grams of fat and 7.5 grams of carb per 3-ounce (85-grams) serving (55).Be mindful of what you pair with these foods. Nuts, MCT or coconut oil, or unsweetened peanut butter can make this a filling keto-friendly snack, while granola or fruits can increase their carb count. 13. Certain fresh fruitsFruits like mangoes, bananas, and grapes are naturally higher in carbs. While delicious and nutrient-dense, they could keep you from reaching or maintaining ketosis.Although these can’t be staples in a keto diet given their high carb content, they still boast an array of nutrients and dietary fiber, which is good for your digestion and heart health (22). As such, you may choose to use them occasionally and sparingly on top of Greek yogurt or a salad. Just be mindful of your portion sizes and daily macronutrient targets.Here’s the breakdown of each fruit’s carb count (56, 57, 58):Type of fruitServing sizeCarbsFiberMango1/2 cup (82.5 grams)12 grams1 gramBanana1/2 banana (58 grams)13 grams1 gramGrapes1/2 cup (46 grams)8 grams<1 gramIf you’re still craving more fruit, reach for raspberries, strawberries, starfruit, unsweetened açaí puree, or coconut, as these are lower in carbs (39, 59, 60, 61).14. Beans and other legumesLegumes like beans, lentils, and chickpeas may be challenging to incorporate into your keto diet (62, 63, 64). Still, they boast dietary fiber, protein, calcium, and other micronutrients. As such, fitting in small portions might be worth the effort.Green beans and black soybeans are the lowest in carbs. Try pan-frying them to use sparingly as crunchy toppings on keto-friendly salads or bowls (65, 66).Here’s the carb content for popular legumes for reference (65, 66):Type of legumeCarbs per 100 gramsCarbs in smaller portionsBlack beans24 grams5 grams per 1/8 cup (22 grams)Lentils20 grams5 grams per 1/8 cup (25 grams)Chickpeas27 grams5 grams per 1/8 cup (21 grams)Green beans7 grams5 grams per 1/2 cup (73 grams)Black soybeans9 grams6 grams per 1/2 cup (65 grams)Processed legumes could fit into your keto diet in modest portions, too. For example, in the form of hummus, which is made from chickpeas and tahini, a type of sesame butter. You can also try non-bean-based dips like baba ganoush or guacamole.15. Quinoa and other grainsWhile loaded in nutrients, grains like quinoa and millet are too high to become a staple in your keto diet.For example, 1/2 cup (93 grams) of cooked quinoa packs 20 grams of carbs, only 2 of which are dietary fiber (67). If you still want to include quinoa in your keto diet, consider it a garnish rather than a central part of your meal.16. ChocolateDark chocolate with a cacao content of at least 70% can be part of your keto diet in small amounts (68).Meanwhile, milk and white chocolates aren’t keto-friendly, given their added sugar content (68, 69, 70):Type of chocolateServing sizeFatCarbsAdded sugarDark chocolate (70–85% cacao)1/2 ounce (14 grams)6 grams7.5 grams3.4 gramsMilk chocolate1/2 ounce (14 grams)4.8 grams7.9 grams7.4 gramsWhite chocolate1/2 ounce (14 grams)5 grams 8 grams8 gramsLook for chocolate that has more than 70% cacao and is low in added sugar. Or opt for dark chocolate made especially for keto diets. The bottom lineThe keto diet is high in fat, moderate in protein, and very low in carbs. It aims to put your body in a ketogenic state, in which fat is used as fuel instead of carbs.Its long-term health effects aren’t as well understood, and in the short term, it could put you at risk for nutritional deficiencies.When following the diet, avoid high carb foods like dried fruits, refined carbs, sweet sauces, and reduced fat diet foods. These can provide too many carbs or not enough fat and inhibit ketosis.Also, limit your portions of healthy, higher carb fruits, vegetables, and grains. While these can be suitable on occasion, you still need to watch your serving size and your total carb count for the day to stay within your keto macro targets.While you’re the expert on how your own mind and body feel, keep in mind that there are no long-term studies on the health effects of a keto diet. The diet can keep you from nourishing your body with healthy legumes, nutritious fruits, vegetables, and whole grains — preventing the proven long-term health benefits they confer. Limiting these can cause digestive issues and even micronutrient deficiencies (2, 3, 71, 72). Therefore, following a keto diet is not recommended at this time. Instead, aim for small, meaningful changes for sustainable success and health.8 Foods to Eat on a Ketogenic DietJust one thingTry this today: Whip up some keto-friendly hummus for a satisfying and versatile dip. Be generous with the tahini, garlic, olive oil, and lemon juice, and add chickpeas sparingly.Was this helpful?



List Of Foods To Avoid On Keto

            
              
              
                14 Jul, 2020
                Posted by: Wellversed Health
              
            

            KETO DIET
A Keto Diet also known as Ketogenic Diet, is a high fat, protein rich and low carb (carbohydrate) eating plan. A Ketogenic Diet helps the body attain the process ketosis wherein  the body starts utilizing body fats as the primary energy source instead of carbohydrates or glucose. The Keto diet  was initially introduced in the 19th century for the treatment of diabetes. 
The Keto Diet gained popularity amongst patients of many other diseases as well.Research and studies show that the Keto diet is also capable of curing some rare kinds of cancers in the long term. Inculcating the Keto diet in your lifestyle would lead to overall body fitness and proper health. A Ketogenic diet generally has no serious side effects except a few like nausea, sugar cravings, headache etc. in the initial days of the diet due to Keto flu.
TIPS TO AVOID KETO FLU
Keto flu is a very common problem with everyone doing this diet for the first time but it can be avoided by keeping some simple tips in mind.Ketogenic diet gives the best results when followed strictly without skipping meals and following the rule of high fats and low carbs. 
The basic rule of Keto is to eat high fats; adequate protein and low carb until you finally reach the point of satiety.The rule which follows this is to stay hydrated, try to drink as much as water you can because the  body tends to lose a lot of water molecules when it goes on ketosis and consuming more and more water would be beneficial. 
You should also keep in control the salt level of the body which helps the body to stay at optimum temperatures and function properly without problems like headache, anxiety, frequent hunger attacks etc. Make sure you take a little more salt than the usual quantity in the first few days to help your body adjust with the new changes caused by Keto flu and develop ketone acids. 
WHO SHOULD AVOID KETO
But not every doctor or health specialist prescribes the keto diet or the ketogenic diet to people, since everyone has a different body metabolism and different reactions to specific diets. 
Also, people with previous disease history or serious health conditions, eating disorders, lethargic, skinny , allergic to specific food items, people who need specific gram of carbs (which is more than the ideal gram of carbs prescribed in the Keto diet) should refrain from following the diet because it can have adverse effects as well.
Therefore before following a Ketogenic diet (or any other diet which has its strict rules and guidelines, a person should undergo a health checkup, including the blood sugar level, allergy tests to rule out the chances of rare health complications which could worsen the health after following Keto.
HEALTH BENEFITS 
Keto has enormous health benefits. Ever since it became effective in the treatment of epilepsy, it has been experimented and has had important roles in the treatment of many other diseases successfully such as Polycystic Ovary Syndromes, heart related, nervous system related diseases, kidney stones, chronic disorders, type 2 diabetes etc. Studies show that the Keto diet can also prevent and cure  some rare kinds of cancers in the long term.
Some of the diseases in which Keto is seen very effective are:

Chronic diseases such as Heart Diseases, Kidney Stones etc. 



Epilepsy - A disease which causes seizures due to excessive brain activities. Studies have shown that Keto diets can reduce seizure frequency and severity in many children and adults with epilepsy who don't respond well to the drug therapy. 



PCOS or Polycystic Ovary Syndrome- PCOS is a disease marked by hormonal dysfunction that often results in irregular periods and infertility. Females with a PCOS following a ketogenic diet may experience weight loss, reduction in insulin levels and improvement in reproductive hormone function.



Diabetes - Diabetes is a commonly occurring disease in which the body experiences high amounts of blood sugar in the form of glucose. People with diabetes have found Keto to be a good diet to follow to keep the glucose level in check by eliminating high carb and glucose foods.

 

Rare Cancers


Parkinson's 


Autism in Children and Adults

In the current scenario, Keto is well known for helping getting rid of extra fat on the body i.e. losing weight and balancing the hormonal imbalances in the body. 
In an ideal Ketogenic diet, the meal comprises only 5% carbs (below 20 gram of carbs), 25% protein and a huge 70% saturated fats as well as healthy fats. This diet, if followed over a good period of time, helps the liver to break down the fats and produce ketones which help the body enter the state of ketosis. 
Amino Acids are the Building Blocks of Protein. The essential amino acids form polypeptides and ultimately proteins important for protein synthesis, muscle tissue repair and nutrient absorption etc processes in the body.
This blog gives a vivid detail of the food items which should be avoided in the Keto diet as they are high in carbohydrates and can cause hindrance in the smooth process of Ketosis.

FOODS TO AVOID ON A KETO DIET
These following food items should be strictly removed from the daily platter of a Keto dieter.
FOOD GRAINS
Food grains such as wheat flour, whole wheat flour, oatmeal's etc are very high in carbohydrates which can hinder the process of ketosis.Although they can be consumed in very limited quantities, it is advisable to avoid including them in the daily meals while following a keto diet.
It is to be noted that not only the grains mentioned below but also the products made from them should be avoided since they are equally high in carbs (pasta, bread, biscuits etc)

Oatmeal
Wheat Grains
Whole Wheat Flour
Rice
Quinoa 
Rye
Barley
Corn

FRUITS 
Fruits are mostly high in fibre, glucose and carbs content which naturally make them avoidable for a person on a keto diet. However some fruits like avocado and olives are extremely keto friendly and are a must to consume. Avocado Salad, Extra Virgin Olive Oil, Olive Oil are some of the popular keto ingredients which are made out of these.
Berries such as blackberries, blueberries,  raspberries and strawberries are also keto friendly as these are high in nutrients, are a good protein source and extremely rich in healthy fats.
Here's a list of fruits to avoid on a Keto diet:

Apples (don't be surprise)
Grapes
Bananas
Dates
Mangoes
Peaches
Pineapples
Raisins
Pears

VEGETABLES
You will be left quite surprised that not only fruits but also vegetables can be non Keto friendly. It is a thumb rule of Keto to avoid all the vegetables which grow beneath the ground because they are excessively rich in starch and carbohydrates content.
These veggies should be avoided at all costs:

Potatoes (As they contain a lot of starch and carbs, equally harmful for diabetics)
Sweet Potatoes (High in glucose, starch and carbs content again)
Baked Potatoes
Corn
Peas
Carrot
Yam

LEGUMES AND BEANS
Legumes and beans are usually high in nutrients such as iron, potassium, zinc etc, have moderate protein content but at the same time they contain a lot of carbs as well which make them harmful for the Ketogenic diet.

Black Beans
Baked Beans
Green Beans
Lima Beans
Lentils
Lobia
Kidney Beans
Green Peas

BEVERAGES
A majority of drinks which we consume in our daily lives are high in sugar content and sometimes contain hidden sugar and carbs as well which might hinder the formation of Ketones in the body.
A Keto dieter should also avoid large intakes of BCAA or Branched Amino Acids Base as the excessive protein synthesis in the body can tend to increase the insulin levels in the body which can cause a problem in Ketosis.
All kinds of fruit juices should also be avoided because fruits are naturally high in carbs, glucose and fruit juices contain many artificial additives as well which make them harmful.

Cola
Soda
Margarita 
Fruit Beer
Protein Shakes
Vitamin Water
Lemonade
Energy Drinks
Iced Tea
Frappuccinos

LOW FAT DAIRY PRODUCTS 
Low fat dairy products should be avoided on a Keto diet because they are an unnecessary addition to the meal. They may also contain carbohydrates which won't be good for the meal since all forms of carb diets are to be avoided.

Low Fat Milkshake
Toned Milk
Low Fat Butter
Condensed Milk
Low Fat Cream

ARTIFICIAL SWEETENERS 
Artificial sweeteners are anyway harmful since they contain a lot of additives. Sweeteners containing Aspartame, Acesulfame, Sucralose, Saccharin can lead to sugar cravings and they are also linked to other health issues such as migraine pain, cholesterol levels, blood sugar levels etc. 
Keto is all about being loyal to the diet and strictly following the tips and tricks related to it. Just avoid these specific food products and you will see the benefits of following a Keto Diet soon.
     