
List Of Foods To Avoid On Keto

            
              
              
                14 Jul, 2020
                Posted by: Wellversed Health
              
            

            KETO DIET
A Keto Diet also known as Ketogenic Diet, is a high fat, protein rich and low carb (carbohydrate) eating plan. A Ketogenic Diet helps the body attain the process ketosis wherein  the body starts utilizing body fats as the primary energy source instead of carbohydrates or glucose. The Keto diet  was initially introduced in the 19th century for the treatment of diabetes. 
The Keto Diet gained popularity amongst patients of many other diseases as well.Research and studies show that the Keto diet is also capable of curing some rare kinds of cancers in the long term. Inculcating the Keto diet in your lifestyle would lead to overall body fitness and proper health. A Ketogenic diet generally has no serious side effects except a few like nausea, sugar cravings, headache etc. in the initial days of the diet due to Keto flu.
TIPS TO AVOID KETO FLU
Keto flu is a very common problem with everyone doing this diet for the first time but it can be avoided by keeping some simple tips in mind.Ketogenic diet gives the best results when followed strictly without skipping meals and following the rule of high fats and low carbs. 
The basic rule of Keto is to eat high fats; adequate protein and low carb until you finally reach the point of satiety.The rule which follows this is to stay hydrated, try to drink as much as water you can because the  body tends to lose a lot of water molecules when it goes on ketosis and consuming more and more water would be beneficial. 
You should also keep in control the salt level of the body which helps the body to stay at optimum temperatures and function properly without problems like headache, anxiety, frequent hunger attacks etc. Make sure you take a little more salt than the usual quantity in the first few days to help your body adjust with the new changes caused by Keto flu and develop ketone acids. 
WHO SHOULD AVOID KETO
But not every doctor or health specialist prescribes the keto diet or the ketogenic diet to people, since everyone has a different body metabolism and different reactions to specific diets. 
Also, people with previous disease history or serious health conditions, eating disorders, lethargic, skinny , allergic to specific food items, people who need specific gram of carbs (which is more than the ideal gram of carbs prescribed in the Keto diet) should refrain from following the diet because it can have adverse effects as well.
Therefore before following a Ketogenic diet (or any other diet which has its strict rules and guidelines, a person should undergo a health checkup, including the blood sugar level, allergy tests to rule out the chances of rare health complications which could worsen the health after following Keto.
HEALTH BENEFITS 
Keto has enormous health benefits. Ever since it became effective in the treatment of epilepsy, it has been experimented and has had important roles in the treatment of many other diseases successfully such as Polycystic Ovary Syndromes, heart related, nervous system related diseases, kidney stones, chronic disorders, type 2 diabetes etc. Studies show that the Keto diet can also prevent and cure  some rare kinds of cancers in the long term.
Some of the diseases in which Keto is seen very effective are:

Chronic diseases such as Heart Diseases, Kidney Stones etc. 



Epilepsy - A disease which causes seizures due to excessive brain activities. Studies have shown that Keto diets can reduce seizure frequency and severity in many children and adults with epilepsy who don't respond well to the drug therapy. 



PCOS or Polycystic Ovary Syndrome- PCOS is a disease marked by hormonal dysfunction that often results in irregular periods and infertility. Females with a PCOS following a ketogenic diet may experience weight loss, reduction in insulin levels and improvement in reproductive hormone function.



Diabetes - Diabetes is a commonly occurring disease in which the body experiences high amounts of blood sugar in the form of glucose. People with diabetes have found Keto to be a good diet to follow to keep the glucose level in check by eliminating high carb and glucose foods.

 

Rare Cancers


Parkinson's 


Autism in Children and Adults

In the current scenario, Keto is well known for helping getting rid of extra fat on the body i.e. losing weight and balancing the hormonal imbalances in the body. 
In an ideal Ketogenic diet, the meal comprises only 5% carbs (below 20 gram of carbs), 25% protein and a huge 70% saturated fats as well as healthy fats. This diet, if followed over a good period of time, helps the liver to break down the fats and produce ketones which help the body enter the state of ketosis. 
Amino Acids are the Building Blocks of Protein. The essential amino acids form polypeptides and ultimately proteins important for protein synthesis, muscle tissue repair and nutrient absorption etc processes in the body.
This blog gives a vivid detail of the food items which should be avoided in the Keto diet as they are high in carbohydrates and can cause hindrance in the smooth process of Ketosis.

FOODS TO AVOID ON A KETO DIET
These following food items should be strictly removed from the daily platter of a Keto dieter.
FOOD GRAINS
Food grains such as wheat flour, whole wheat flour, oatmeal's etc are very high in carbohydrates which can hinder the process of ketosis.Although they can be consumed in very limited quantities, it is advisable to avoid including them in the daily meals while following a keto diet.
It is to be noted that not only the grains mentioned below but also the products made from them should be avoided since they are equally high in carbs (pasta, bread, biscuits etc)

Oatmeal
Wheat Grains
Whole Wheat Flour
Rice
Quinoa 
Rye
Barley
Corn

FRUITS 
Fruits are mostly high in fibre, glucose and carbs content which naturally make them avoidable for a person on a keto diet. However some fruits like avocado and olives are extremely keto friendly and are a must to consume. Avocado Salad, Extra Virgin Olive Oil, Olive Oil are some of the popular keto ingredients which are made out of these.
Berries such as blackberries, blueberries,  raspberries and strawberries are also keto friendly as these are high in nutrients, are a good protein source and extremely rich in healthy fats.
Here's a list of fruits to avoid on a Keto diet:

Apples (don't be surprise)
Grapes
Bananas
Dates
Mangoes
Peaches
Pineapples
Raisins
Pears

VEGETABLES
You will be left quite surprised that not only fruits but also vegetables can be non Keto friendly. It is a thumb rule of Keto to avoid all the vegetables which grow beneath the ground because they are excessively rich in starch and carbohydrates content.
These veggies should be avoided at all costs:

Potatoes (As they contain a lot of starch and carbs, equally harmful for diabetics)
Sweet Potatoes (High in glucose, starch and carbs content again)
Baked Potatoes
Corn
Peas
Carrot
Yam

LEGUMES AND BEANS
Legumes and beans are usually high in nutrients such as iron, potassium, zinc etc, have moderate protein content but at the same time they contain a lot of carbs as well which make them harmful for the Ketogenic diet.

Black Beans
Baked Beans
Green Beans
Lima Beans
Lentils
Lobia
Kidney Beans
Green Peas

BEVERAGES
A majority of drinks which we consume in our daily lives are high in sugar content and sometimes contain hidden sugar and carbs as well which might hinder the formation of Ketones in the body.
A Keto dieter should also avoid large intakes of BCAA or Branched Amino Acids Base as the excessive protein synthesis in the body can tend to increase the insulin levels in the body which can cause a problem in Ketosis.
All kinds of fruit juices should also be avoided because fruits are naturally high in carbs, glucose and fruit juices contain many artificial additives as well which make them harmful.

Cola
Soda
Margarita 
Fruit Beer
Protein Shakes
Vitamin Water
Lemonade
Energy Drinks
Iced Tea
Frappuccinos

LOW FAT DAIRY PRODUCTS 
Low fat dairy products should be avoided on a Keto diet because they are an unnecessary addition to the meal. They may also contain carbohydrates which won't be good for the meal since all forms of carb diets are to be avoided.

Low Fat Milkshake
Toned Milk
Low Fat Butter
Condensed Milk
Low Fat Cream

ARTIFICIAL SWEETENERS 
Artificial sweeteners are anyway harmful since they contain a lot of additives. Sweeteners containing Aspartame, Acesulfame, Sucralose, Saccharin can lead to sugar cravings and they are also linked to other health issues such as migraine pain, cholesterol levels, blood sugar levels etc. 
Keto is all about being loyal to the diet and strictly following the tips and tricks related to it. Just avoid these specific food products and you will see the benefits of following a Keto Diet soon.
     
          
          
          


        
          
            
            
              
                
    
    Share
                
              
             
            
            
            
              
    
    Tweet
              
            
              

          
        

          

        
            
        
          
            
          
            

              Leave a comment

              

              
                Comments have to be approved before showing up
              

              
                
                  
                    
                  

                  
                    
                  
                

                
                  
                
              

              
            
          
            
        
        
      

      
        
  
    
    
    
      

          
            

              
                
                
                
electro-search-icon


              

            
          
    
    	

    
    
      
          
            

              
                About Wellversed
              

              
              Wellversed is the world leader of modern nutrition products for all kinds of dietary regimes. The aim of Wellversed is to enable dietary shift without the need for any behavior change.
              

            
          

        

    
    
      
          
            

              
                Recent posts
              

                

                  
                    

                      
                        
                          
                            
                              
                            
                          
                        

                        
                          
                            What Are The Different Types Of Keto?
                          

                          
                            21 Sep, 2020
                          
                        
                               

                    
                  
                    

                      
                        
                          
                            
                              
                            
                          
                        

                        
                          
                            Heart Palpitations On A Keto Diet: Causes and Cure
                          

                          
                            24 Mar, 2020
                          
                        
                               

                    
                  

                
              

            
          

        

    
    
      
          
            

              
                Tags
              

              
                All